This technical note describes a dynamic causal or generative model for
time-series, under ergodic assumptions. It is based on a linearization
of mean-field models of coupled dynamical systems; in our case,
neuronal subpopulations. Under the assumption that the system is
driven by exogenous fluctuations with known (or parametric) spectral
densities and uniform phase-distributions, it is possible to predict
the coherence and phase-differences observed among system responses;
in our case electrophysiological measurements. This enables the model
to be optimized using empirical measures of (complex) cross-spectral
densities and thereby access hidden parameters governing the data-
generating process (e.g., coupling parameters and rate constants). We
validate this model using simulations and illustrate its application
using real local field potential (LFP) data.The contributions of this
work are threefold. First, it generalizes variational Bayesian
techniques (Variational Laplace: Friston et al., 2007) used to invert
models of empirical data so that they can be applied to complex data.
This generalization can be applied in any setting that uses
variational Laplacian schemes to select and optimize models. It is
illustrated here in the context of Dynamic Causal Modeling of steady-
state responses in electrophysiology. Second, we use the
generalization to show how conventional time-series measures of
activity and coupling in the frequency domain can be derived from
Dynamic Causal Models that have a biophysically plausible form.
Finally, we show how this enables the computation of conventional
measures, such as coherence and phase-delay functions, between hidden
states; in other words, between sources as opposed to sensors.Current
applications of Dynamic Causal Modeling have been used to explain
real-valued data features, including evoked transients, induced
responses and power spectra (Kiebel et al., 2008a,b), using
biologically informed mean-field models of coupled dynamical systems.
The ability to model complex-valued data features offers two key
advantages. First, while current DCMs can estimate conduction delays,
the estimates do not have access to phase information. In principle,
models that can predict or generate complex data enable the phase
relationships among observed responses to inform and constrain
estimates of model parameters, like conduction delays. More
importantly, the extension to complex valued data bridges the
technical divide between model-based and model-free analyses (Brown et
al., 2004; Kay and Marple, 1981), as we hope to show.The
generalization to complex data was motivated by DCM for steady-state
responses, as applied to electrophysiological time-series acquired
under particular brain states (Moran et al., 2007, 2008). Our focus
here is on the potential importance of complex-valued data features
and the implications for the inversion or optimization of models of
those features. We try to illustrate the potential of this scheme by
looking at how precisely axonal conduction delays can be estimated,
when fitting complex cross-spectra, in relation to real-valued cross-
spectra. More generally, we anticipate that this DCM will provide a
useful link between the generative modeling of biological time-series
and conventional (linear systems) characterizations (e.g. Kay and
Marple, 1981) that predominate in electrophysiology. This link rests
upon the fact that conventional measures (e.g., coherence, phase-delay
and auto-correlation functions) are caused by neuronal circuits with
particular biophysical parameters (e.g., synaptic efficacy, time
constants and conduction delays). This means that biophysical
parameter estimates can be used to create conditional estimates of
coherence and cross-correlation functions. In turn, this means that it
is possible to infer which biophysical parameters are responsible for
observed coherence or phase-delays. Conceptually, the difference
between DCM and conventional measures of coupling (i.e., functional
connectivity) lies in the fact that DCM appeals to an explicit
generative or forward model of how data features are caused (i.e.,
effective connectivity). In this instance, the data features are
provided by the spectral behavior of observed time-series that are,
usually, the end point of conventional analyses. The advantage of
having an underlying generative model is that one can estimate the
spectral behavior and relationships, not just among observed sensors
or data channels, but between the neuronal sources generating those
data. Furthermore, one can map quantitatively between the underlying
biophysical parameters and spectral summaries. We will illustrate
these points using simulated and real data.Dynamic Causal Modeling for
steady-state responses has been used to make inferences about hidden
neuronal states and parameters using both invasive and non-invasive
data. There has been a considerable effort to validate this approach
using simulations, developmental manipulations and
psychopharmacological interventions (Moran et al., 2008, 2009). There
is now a large literature on Dynamic Causal Modeling in
electrophysiology (Chen et al., 2008; Daunizeau et al., 2009; David et
al., 2006a,b; Kiebel et al., 2007) and, in particular, models for
steady-state activity (Moran et al., 2007, 2008, 2009, 2011). We take
DCM for steady-state responses as the starting point for the causal
modeling of complex-valued data. This is because this current scheme
uses the absolute value of the cross-spectrum between channels.
However, the cross-spectrum is a complex quantity, which means that it
has the attributes of modulus (absolute value or amplitude) and
argument (angle or phase). This means that one is throwing away
information when using absolute measures to invert or fit generative
models. In what follows, we look at the advantages of using both
amplitude and phase information.The phase of the cross-spectrum is
usually taken to indicate something about systematic lags or delays
between two signals. If one signal appears in the other, after a
constant time lag, then the phase-difference scales with frequency. In
practice, this notion has been used, for example, in epilepsy research
where authors have used phase differences between signals from
different intracerebral electrodes or EEG channels to estimate
conduction or propagation delays (Brazier, 1972; Gotman, 1981). A
regression of the phase-difference on frequency is also often used to
estimate temporal delays over a particular frequency range (Rosenberg
et al., 1989). More generally, one can divide the phase-difference by
frequency to quantify time lags as a function of frequency. A further
advantage of working with the complex cross-spectrum is that its
inverse Fourier transform provides the cross-correlation function
between two time-series. If the correlation structure is dominated by
a single time delay, the latency of this delay can often be inferred
from the timing of a peak in the cross correlation. In short, a
generative model of complex-valued data features (e.g. cross-spectra)
provides a more complete model of data and provides conditional
estimates of coherence, phase-delay and cross-correlation functions
that are implicitly constrained by the functional architectures
inducing those correlations. The examples in this paper attempt to
illustrate this in a practical fashion.This note comprises four
sections. In the first, we consider the nature of cross-spectra and
their relationship to coherence and phase-delays. This section is used
to frame conventional measures of coupling in terms of the underlying
transfer functions between sources generating data. Crucially it shows
that although coherence is sensitive to the dispersion of phase-
differences between two sources or sensors, coherence does not provide
a complete picture of coupling, because it is insensitive to phase-
delays In this section, we look at the nature of conventional measures
of functional connectivity from the point of view of phase-differences
and their distribution. The main points made in this treatment are:
(i) Coherence is a function of the absolute value of the cross-spectra
and, as such, provides an incomplete picture of spectral dependencies
among stationary time-series. (ii) Furthermore, even if we consider
complex cross-spectra, their phase information cannot be interpreted
in terms of time-delays, unless we know (or model) how they were
caused. Specifically, when the coupling between two sources of data is
bidirectional, there is no straightforward correspondence between
phase and time-delays. The resulting ambiguity can only be resolved by
reference to a model of how phase-differences are generated. This
section concludes by briefly reprising the generative models used in
DCM of steady-state responses that resolve this ambiguity.Where
possible, we will denote Fourier transforms by upper case letters such
that The complex coherence function between two wide-sense stationary
signals Carter, 1987; Priestley, 1981). The magnitude-squared
coherence (Carter, 1987), The coherence can be factorized into the
correlation between the signal amplitudes and the (circular)
dispersion of their phase-differences (e.g. Priestley, 1981; Friston
et al., 1997, (Eq. A3)):Here, (2) shows that coherence depends on a
function of the density Mardia and Jupp, 1999; Pascual-Marqui, 2007)
and reflects the circular variance or dispersion of phase-differences.
Eq.Â (2) means that coherence is effectively the normalized absolute
value of the cross-spectrum, while phase-synchronization is the
absolute value of the cross-spectrum when derived from normalized
Fourier transforms (see Pascual-Marqui, 2007 for a generalization to
multivariate time-series). The key thing to note here is that
coherence does not change with the average phase-difference, only its
dispersion; that is, coherence reflects the stability of the phase
difference.In what follows, we will be concerned with generative
models of data features that disclose the mapping between some
exogenous (neuronal) fluctuations or innovations The cross-spectral
density is the sum of cross-spectra induced by each innovation, where
there is an innovation for each source of activity that contributes to
observed signals. The cross spectrum due to the Here, (3) just means
that the predicted cross-spectrum is a linear mixture of cross-spectra
induced by each innovation. This mixture depends on the mapping from
each innovation or source to the channels in question. For example, in
local field potential recordings, the number of innovations and
channels could be the same. However, in non-invasive electromagnetic
studies, the number of channels can be much greater than the number of
sources.Eqs.Â (2) and (3) provide a generative model of sample cross-
spectra. We have exploited this sort of model for steady-state
responses extensively, when trying to infer the neuronal architectures
generating local field potentials and other electromagnetic signals
(Moran et al., 2007, 2008). However, these models used real-valued
cross-spectra (3) shows that the cross-spectrum is a mixture of
complex components due to each innovation, where the phase-differences
This is a rather complicated integral to evaluate (involving Gauss
hypergeometric forms; see Lee et al., 1994). Fig.Â 1 (left panel) shows
the implicit density over phase-differences for a simple example with
asymmetries in how innovations drive the signals. It can be seen that
the density peaks at the phase-difference induced by each innovation.
If we now plot the phase-delay function arg{(4)), we see that the two
are closely related (but are not the same because the phase of an
average is not the average of a phase). Fig.Â 1 (right panel) shows the
relationship (dots) between the phase of the cross-spectrum and the
average phase-difference; this relationship was disclosed by varying
the relative power of the two innovations, where lnÂ Fig.Â 1 illustrates
the key problem with interpreting phase-delays in terms of time-
delays, when the sources of data are reciprocally coupled: the phase-
delay function arg{Fig.Â 1, which shows that phase-delays are bounded
by the phase-differences induced by the two innovations. This means
that the strength and time-delay of connections among distributed
sources of data cannot be recovered from cross-spectra (or phase-delay
functions) in the absence of a generative model that specifies how
sources are connected.In summary both the real and imaginary parts of
cross-spectra contain useful information about the underlying system.
The modulus relates to the measure of coherence, while the argument
(phase or angle) is a complicated function of phase-delays induced by
exogenous fluctuations (innovations). However, neither provides a
unique or complete description of how data are generated and may be
better thought of as data features that have yet to be explained by a
generative model. In what follows, we will therefore consider the key
data feature the sample cross-spectra The kernels obtain analytically
from the Jacobian This means the kernels are functions of the model's
equations of motion and output mapping. The output mapping may be a
simple gain function (for LFP data) or an electromagnetic forward
model (for EEG and MEG data). The use of the chain rule follows from
the fact that the only way past inputs can affect current outputs is
through hidden states. The particular equations of motion used here
correspond to a neural-mass model that has been used extensively in
the causal modeling of electromagnetic data (David and Friston, 2003;
Jansen and Rit, 1995; Moran et al., 2008). These equations implement a
simple but biologically motivated (alpha-function based) model (Jansen
and Rit, 1995) that captures the key aspects of synaptic processing;
fast excitation and inhibition in layered cortical sources (Moran et
al., 2011). The equations for a single source are summarized in
Fig.Â 2.In a DCM comprising Fig.Â 2). These firing rates are a sigmoid
function of depolarization, which we approximate with a linear gain
function (evaluated at the system's fixed point; Moran et al., 2007).
Subpopulations within each source are coupled by intrinsic connections
(with a conduction delay of 4Â ms: Lumer et al. (1997)), whose
strengths are parameterized by The innovations correspond to exogenous
fluctuations Freeman et al., 2003; Stevens, 1972):As noted above, one
innovation is associated with each neuronal node or source.The
observer function is a mapping from This completes the description of
the neuronal model and, implicitly, the generative model for modeled
cross-spectra. This model contains unknown parameters (3). To complete
our specification of a generative model, we presume the data (sample
cross-spectra) to be a mixture of the predicted cross-spectra, channel
noise and Gaussian prediction error (see Moran et al., 2009 for
details)The channel noise, like the innovations, is parameterized in
terms of (unknown) white (Moran et al. (2009) for more details.This
section has motivated the use of complex cross-spectra as data
features that summarize the behavior of ergodic time-series. We have
seen that only the absolute values of cross-spectra are used to form
measures of coherence. Although coherence depends upon the dispersion
of phase-differences, it is not sensitive to the expected or
systematic phase-differences that could be introduced by neuronal
dynamics or conduction delays. A simple solution to this is to use a
generative model of both the real and imaginary parts of the cross-
spectra and fit these predictions to sample cross-spectra. To do this
we need a Bayesian model inversion scheme that can handle complex-
valued data.In this section, we consider a generalization of the
variational scheme (Friston et al., 2007) used to invert Dynamic
Causal Models that can handle complex-valued data. In what follows, we
will briefly summarize the overall principles of model inversion and
list the special differences that attend the analysis of complex-
valued data.Almost universally, the fitting or inversion of Dynamic
Causal Models uses a variational free-energy bound on the log-evidence
for a model Friston et al., 2007 for details). This bound is optimized
with respect to a variational density Usually, one first compares
different models (e.g., with and without particular connections) using
their log-evidence and then turns to inferences on parameters, under
the model selected (for an overview of procedures for inference on
model structure and parameters in DCM, see Stephan et al., 2010).
Here, we focus on the use of the conditional density, given a single
model, which we assume has a Gaussian form The free-energy is the
average of the log-likelihood and log-prior of the model under the
variational density and its entropy (see Friston et al., 2007; Kiebel
et al., 2008a,b). For nonlinear models, under Gaussian assumptions
about the variational density and observation noise, this has a very
simple form:Here, (6)) and (8). This is because the sum of an absolute
value is not the absolute value of a sum. This means the sum, implicit
in the linear algebra above, has to be performed separately for real
and imaginary parts. In a similar vein, the partial derivatives of the
Gibb's energy The gradients in Eq.Â (9) are used in a Gauss-Newton
scheme to optimize the parameters iteratively, until the free-energy
has been maximized. In practice, things are a little more complicated
because one often makes a mean-field assumption when estimating
parameters of the model and the noise precision, Î Friston et al.
(2007).In this section, we have considered the central role of the
free-energy bound on log-evidence used in model selection and
inversion. The only thing we have to worry about, when dealing with
complex-valued data, is to separate the real and imaginary parts of
the data (and implicitly prediction errors), when evaluating the free-
energy and its gradients. Having done this, we can then use standard
schemes to optimize the parameters of any Dynamic Causal Model and
select among competing models to find the one that has the highest
free-energy (log-evidence). We now illustrate the application of this
scheme using simulated data.In this section, we use simulated data
from four sources, with known directed connections and delays, to
establish the face validity of the inversion scheme of the previous
section. Our particular focus here is on the improvement in the
precision of parameter estimates, when including the phase information
in complex cross-spectra. To illustrate this we will look closely at
the conditional density over conduction delays. We will then be in a
position to compare these estimates with true values and how these
conduction delays translate into phase-delays and time-lags at the
level of simulated population dynamics.To simulate data, we used the
(David and Friston, 2003) neural mass model above to simulate four
sources, organized into two pairs. The sources within each pair were
coupled with lateral connections, whereas there was an asymmetric
directed coupling between the first and second pair. This allowed us
to look at predicted and estimated cross-spectra within and between
pairs and illustrate the consequences of reciprocal connections
between sources. The data were generated using the model parameters
estimated from the empirical data of the next section. The only
difference was that we suppressed backward connection to enforce an
asymmetric (directed) coupling between the two pairs. The data were
modeled as arising from pairs of sources in the Globus pallidus (GP)
and subthalamic nucleus (STN). The connections from the GP to the STN
constitute the forward (GABAergic) connections of the indirect basal
ganglia pathway, while the reciprocal (glutamatergic) connections are
from the STN to the GP. To suppress these backward connections we set
them to a half, while the forward connections were given a value of
four. The lateral connections were given intermediate values of one.
This means our forward connections were 2Â ÃÂ 4Â =Â 8 times stronger than
the backward connections (i.e., the first pair of sources drove the
second). The conduction delays were as estimated from the empirical
data. See Fig.Â 3 (left panels) for a schematic of this small network
of sources.Data were simulated over 4Â s with time bins of 4Â ms. Cross-
spectra were generated directly in frequency space, assuming that each
source was driven by random fluctuations and that LFP data were
observed with a signal to noise ratio of about 10%. The spectral
characteristics of the innovations and channel noise were controlled
by mixing white and pink noise components (see Eqs.Â (6) and (7)),
using the conditional parameter estimates from the empirical analysis
reported in the next section.An example of these simulated data
(sample cross-spectra) is shown in Fig.Â 3 (right panels) and
illustrates the characteristic beta coupling seen in patients with
Parkinson's disease and animal lesion models thereof (Lehmkuhle et
al., 2009; Silberstein et al., 2005). These simulated cross-spectra
were then used to invert the neural mass model described. Because
connections strengths and time delays (and other model parameters) are
nonnegative quantities, their prior mean is scaled by a free parameter
with a log-normal distribution. We refer to these as the log-scale
parameters, such that a log-scaling of zero returns the prior mean.
Priors, (8), above) are specified in terms of their prior mean Moran
et al., 2008 Table 1 and available in SPM8
http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). The prior variance determines how
far the scale-parameter can move from its prior mean. Parameters, like
the maximum excitatory potential and channel time constants have a
prior variance of Fig.Â 2) and extrinsic between sources (Fig.Â 3).
There is no bias in the estimates; however, the prior variances of the
extrinsic parameters are larger than those of the intrinsic
parameters, allowing for greater divergence from their prior mean in
posterior estimation (c.f. Eq.Â (8)). We have chosen to highlight these
extrinsic connectivity estimates in Fig.Â 4 because these quantify
inter-regional coupling and determine the delays, coherence and phase
at the source and sensor levels.Fig.Â 3 (right panels) shows the
simulated sample cross spectra, in terms of their real and imaginary
parts (upper panels) and the corresponding absolute values or modulus
(lower panel). The auto and cross-spectra for all four simulated
channels are shown as dotted (colored) lines. Following optimization
of the model parameters, the modeled cross-spectra are shown as solid
lines and illustrate the goodness of fit or accuracy of model
inversion (they are barely distinguishable in many cases). The key
thing to take from this example is the pronounced cross-spectral
density in the beta range (20Â Hz) that can be seen in both the real
and imaginary parts. The relative contribution of the complex part is
only about 10% of the real part but is concentrated in the frequency
ranges over which coherence induced by coupling among the sources is
expressed. The imaginary part of the complex cross-spectra (upper
right panel) contains information that enables the estimation of
phase-delays. These predicted cross-spectra are based on the
conditional means of the parameters shown in the next figure.The upper
panel of Fig.Â 4 shows the true and prior values of the key coupling
parameters in this DCM (for clarity, only the strengths and conduction
delays of the extrinsic connections among sources are shown). The
lower two panels show the posterior or conditional densities after
fitting the model to complex (middle panel) and absolute (lower panel)
cross-spectra from the four regions. These estimates allow us to
quantify any improvement in the accuracy or precision of parameter
estimates, in relation to the true values, when inverting complex data
relative to absolute data (Moran et al., 2009). The model comprises
four forward connections (AFig.Â 3), four backward connections (AFirst
we consider the first twelve parameters corresponding to the
connections strengths, Fig.Â 4, one can see that the asymmetry in the
GP-STN network has been detected using the complex spectra, with
larger values for the forward connections than for the backward
connections. However, the shrinkage priors have precluded the forward
connections from attaining their true values of log(4). Interestingly,
the inversion has failed to decrease the backward connections to their
true value of âlog(2). These posterior densities should be compared
with the lower panel in Fig.Â 4, illustrating the equivalent densities
obtained after fitting the absolute cross-spectra. In this example,
the conditional estimates using the complex and modulus schemes are
roughly the same.However, Fig.Â 4 reveals a greater improvement in the
estimation of the delays (Î) for the complex compared to the modulus-
data scheme. These are the second set of twelve parameter estimates.
In particular, we observe that the 90% confidence intervals encompass
the true simulated values in ten of the twelve parameters in the
complex-scheme, compared to only seven of twelve parameters in the
modulus scheme. Crucially, the estimates of the delays are more
uncertain for conventional modulus-based schemes than when using
complex-valued data. We now look at this more closely.The upper panel
of Fig.Â 5 shows the posterior uncertainty (covariance) for all (127)
unknown or free parameters in this DCM. Here, we have plotted the
conditional uncertainty after fitting the modulus data against the
equivalent uncertainty when using complex cross-spectra. As might be
anticipated, the uncertainties about estimates that are informed by
the modulus only are higher than when both real and imaginary parts
are used. These differences are particularly marked for the estimates
of conduction delays (marked by red dots). In some instances, there
has been more than a doubling of the conditional precision or
certainty when using complex data. This is exactly the sort of
behavior we hoped to observe and reflects the improvement afforded by
generative models of complex data. The bottom panel provides the full
conditional density on the conduction delay for one lateral (within
pair) connection (the connection from the third source to the last).
This is the parameter that showed the greatest change in conditional
covariance under the two inversions (indicated by the connecting line
in Fig.Â 4). The true value of the conduction delay was about 5Â ms and
falls within the posterior (shown in blue) when using complex-valued
data. This is very distinct from the broader prior density shown in
red. Interestingly, the posterior density obtained when using the
modulus data has an intermediate value and fails to include the true
value within its 90% posterior confidence interval. These results
illustrate the increased accuracy and precision of posterior
inferences, particularly on delay parameters, that are afforded by
using complex-valued data with both real and imaginary parts.We now
turn to the implicit coherence, phase-delay and cross-correlation
functions predicted by the parameter estimates. In what follows, we
will actually use the cross-covariance functions to present
quantitatively, the shared variance in two signals. Furthermore, we
will divide the angular phase-delay by frequency and display it in
units of milliseconds.The upper right panels in Fig.Â 6 show the sample
(dotted lines) and modeled (solid lines) coherence among the four
simulated channels. The panels below the leading diagonal show the
corresponding phase-delay functions in milliseconds. The leading
diagonal panels (pertaining to auto-spectra) have been omitted,
because the associated phase-delay is zero and the coherence is one
for all frequencies. Note that the coherence between one channel and
another is the same (calculated as the angular phase-delay divided by
frequency). There are two important points to be made using these
results. First, there is a relatively poor correspondence between the
sample and modeled coherence. This is because coherence (defined in
Eq.Â (1); technically the magnitude squared coherence) is a highly
nonlinear function of the original data features (the complex cross-
spectra). From Eq.Â (1) we can see that the nonlinearity results from
normalizing the absolute squared cross-spectra by the product of the
auto-spectra from the two channels (Carter, 1987). It is possible that
the large gamma coherence (~Â 0.4 in some cases) observed from the
channel data and not capitulated in our estimate result from unstable
ratios at frequencies with low power in the auto-spectra. This
contrasts with the modeled coherence based upon the modeled cross-
spectra, which was produced by a biologically-motivated model (the
DCM). The second point to note here is that the phase-delay functions
are not constant over frequencies, despite the fact that the
conduction delays were fixed during data generation. Like the
coherences, the most interesting excursions are contained within the
(beta) frequencies mediated by simulated interactions among the
underlying sources. However, these are not estimates of conduction
delays; as shown in the previous sections, they are lower bounds. For
example, in the highlighted panel in Fig.Â 6 we see how the phase-delay
function would suggest that this lateral (within-source pair)
connection has a conduction delay of 5Â ms, even though the reciprocal
connections have different time-delays (5Â ms for the connection from
source 3 to 4, and 16Â ms for the connection from source 4 to 3). This
illustrates that there is no one-to-one mapping between the phase-
delay and the underlying conduction delay. One can see this
immediately by noting that in general the phase-delay (at any
frequency) between two nodes is by definition anti-symmetric (a sign-
reversal), even though there may be a greater conduction delay from
one source to a second, compared with the conduction delay from the
second to the first. The bottom line here is that it is extremely
difficult to infer the direction of coupling or delays from phase-
delay functions in the setting of reciprocal connections. In contrast,
the conditional estimates of the parameters of the DCM afford an
unambiguous characterization of conduction delays. We will pursue this
in the next section but in the context of coupling among hidden
sources, as opposed to channels.To highlight the distinction between
measures of coupling in channel and source space we will focus on a
forward connection (between the first and fourth regions). Fig.Â 7
reports on this coupling between channels (left panels) and sources
(right panels). For this pair of channels (resp. sources) the first
panel shows the sample and modeled covariance as a function of lag in
milliseconds (noting that the covariance function can be recapitulated
in terms of a cross-correlation measure). The second panel shows the
corresponding sample and modeled coherence as a function of frequency
and the third panel shows the sample and modeled phase-delay in
milliseconds as a function of frequency. Finally, the fourth panel
shows the conditional density over its conduction delay. In all
panels, the solid blue lines represent the true values used to
generate the simulated data. The thin blue lines correspond to the
conditional expectation, while the gray regions correspond to 90%
posterior confidence intervals. The modeled covariance, coherence and
phase-delay functions are all functions of the modeled cross-spectra,
which depend upon the parameters of the generative model. In other
words, there is a direct mapping from any set of parameter values to a
particular covariance, coherence or phase-delay function. This means
that we can compute the posterior confidence intervals simply by
sampling parameters from the posterior or conditional density to
produce a density on these functions. We have shown the conditional
densities in channel and source space side by side to emphasize some
key points.The channel space characterizations include both specific
and nonspecific instrumentation or channel noise that has both white
and colored components (see Eq.Â (7)). In contrast, the source-space
functions are what would have been observed in the absence of channel
noise (and with unit gain on the LFP electrodes). This means the
characterizations in channel space (left panel) are a mixture of
neuronal and non-neuronal spectral features, whereas the source space
results in the right panel reflect the components or coupling due only
to neuronal fluctuations or innovations. Specifically, one can see
that the modeled cross-covariance function in channel space is higher,
tighter and estimated with a greater conditional confidence than the
corresponding modeled and sample covariance function in source space.
This is because the channel data contain a substantial amount of white
noise that is common to all electrodes, resulting in a more peaked
cross covariance function. When removed, one can see more clearly the
underlying cross-covariances due to the neuronal fluctuations. These
have a clear oscillatory pattern in the beta range (note the peaks
around delays 50 and âÂ 50Â ms) that has been shaped by the neuronal
transfer functions associated with each source. Similarly, the modeled
and sample coherence in channel space are much smaller than in source
space. This is due to the channel-specific noise component, which
disperses the phase-differences and suppresses coherence. When this
effect is removed, the coherence increases markedly, particularly at
higher frequencies. In terms of phase and conduction-delays it can be
seen that the modeled phase-delay increases, when considering sources
in relation to channels. This effect can be explained in terms of
nonspecific channel noise that changes the distribution of phase-
differences, so that most of its probability mass is centered at zero
lag. This means the (average) phase-delay shrinks towards zero
(Daffertshofer and Stam, 2007). The implication here is that the
phase-delay between channels represents a lower bound on the neuronal
phase-delay between sources. For example, in the range 20â30Â Hz, the
phase-delay between channels does not exceed 5Â ms, whereas it is
nearly 10Â ms between sources. Crucially, this is not the conduction
delay (which would be the same for all frequencies). The true
conduction delay in this example was ~Â 15Â ms and was estimated to be
about 20Â ms. Happily, the true value fell within the 90% conditional
confidence interval (note that the conduction delays are the same for
sensors and sources because they are an attribute of the underlying
system not its measurement). It is also important to note that one
could not deduce the conduction delay from peaks in the modeled or
sample cross-covariance functions (zero and the conduction delays are
shown as vertical lines). Although there is a small peak in the
(sample and modeled) cross-covariance function between the two
channels, there is no hint of such a peak in the modeled cross-
covariance between sources. This speaks to the complicated
relationship between the true (conduction) delay and how it is
expressed both in terms of phase-delay functions and cross-covariance
(and cross-correlation) functions (for an example from cortico-
muscular recordings see Williams and Baker, 2009).In summary, we have
used simulations to show that it is possible to recover the
biophysical parameters of a reasonably realistic model of distributed
responses from complex-valued data, summarized in terms of their
sample cross-spectra. We have also seen that some parameters
(especially conduction delays) are estimated more precisely when one
uses complex cross-spectra, as opposed to its modulus. By identifying
the system in terms of its parameters, one can derive coherence,
phase-delay and other functions used in conventional measures of
functional connectivity. However, it can be difficult to map back from
these spectral characterizations to the architectures that caused
them. In the next section, we consider an analysis of real data.In
this section, we apply the analysis of the previous section to real
data to demonstrate the reconstruction of conditional estimates of
conventional measures of coupling among hidden sources and to
highlight the complex relationship between these measures and
underlying conduction delays. It should be noted that we are not
presenting this analysis to draw any neurobiological conclusions but
just to illustrate some technical points (an analysis of these data
can be found in Mallet et al., 2008a,b). These data were acquired from
adult male (6-OHDA-lesioned) SpragueâDawley rats (Charles River,
Margate, UK) in accordance with the Animals (Scientific Procedures)
Act, 1986 (UK). Briefly, anesthesia was induced with 4% v/v isoflurane
(Isofloâ¢, Schering-Plough Ltd., Welwyn Garden City, UK) in OMoran et
al., 2008). We then treated these empirical data in exactly the same
way as the simulated data, i.e., we inverted the model with the same
structure and priors as above. The results of this analysis are shown
in Figs.Â 8 to 11, using the same format as for the simulated
data.Fig.Â 8 shows the estimated extrinsic connections strengths and
predicted data features (cross-spectra) using the real data from the
four LFP channels described above. The free-energy objective function
maximized during estimation (Eq.Â (8)) ensures maximum accuracy under
complexity constraints, where complexity is the divergence between the
prior and posterior densities (Penny et al., 2004). In other words, to
avoid over-fitting, the model is constrained by priors over the
parameters. In the present analyses, it is noteworthy that despite
these constraints, the predictions in Fig.Â 8 are very accurate,
capturing most of the salient features in both the real and imaginary
parts of these cross-spectra (with the exception of frequencies above
50Â Hz). The images (lower panels) show the conditional estimates of
the extrinsic coupling strengths for forward, backward and lateral
connections respectively (on the left, middle and right). The
connection strengths and the posterior probability of exceeding their
prior mean (of 32, 16 and 4 [arbitrary units] for forward, backward
and lateral connections, respectively) are displayed alongside the
connections in the left panel: The strongest connection was from the
second pallidal source to the second subthalamic nucleus source. In
terms of backward connections, the most prominent was from the first
subthalamic to the second pallidal source (although both backward
connections were weaker than their forward homologues). The most
salient aspect of the ensuing architecture is a predominantly forward
connectivity from GP to STN sources. This is consistent with the role
of these connections in the indirect pathway. The predictions of this
architecture, in terms of absolute cross-spectra, are shown in
Fig.Â 9.Fig.Â 9 shows the modeled (solid lines) and sample (dotted
lines) absolute cross-spectra among the four channels. The auto-
spectra along the leading diagonal are gathered together on the lower
left. In these data, we see a pronounced spectral peak at 20Â Hz in
most channels; although relatively suppressed in the cross-spectra
involving the fourth channel. The corresponding modeled coherence and
phase-delay functions among the underlying sources are shown in
Fig.Â 10. This figure follows the same format as Fig.Â 6 but presents
the modeled coherence and phase-delay functions in source space (as
opposed to sensor space) having removed channel noise. The most
salient feature of these results is the marked phase-delay (more than
10Â ms) between the second STN source and the remaining sources.
Interestingly, the greatest coherence between this source and the
remaining sources is seen in the gamma range (40â60Â Hz in these data),
whereas beta (20Â Hz) coherence appears to be restricted to exchanges
between the globus pallidus and first subthalamic source. In some
cases these sources appear to have coherence approaching one. Fig.Â 11
uses the same display format as in Fig.Â 7 and shows the covariance,
coherence and phase-delay functions for the connection between the
first globus pallidus source and the second subthalamic nucleus
source. The asymmetry in this bidirectional coupling has induced a
profound asymmetry in the modeled cross-covariance function, with
greater covariances at lags up to about 30Â ms. The modeled phase-delay
function peaks at around 12Â ms and is upper-bounded by the conditional
estimate of the (forward) conduction delay (just above 15Â ms). From a
linear systems perspective, the coupling here appears to be mediated
by gamma coherence (upper right panel). This is consistent with the
(asymmetrical) peaks of the cross-covariance function, where the first
peak (for positive lag) occurs around 25Â ms: this lag is not
inconsistent with the high coherence at 40Â Hz shown on the upper
right. However, it would be a mistake to interpret these results as
showing that signals from the GP to the STN source are delayed by
25Â ms. Furthermore, the differential phase-delay (of 12Â ms) in the
beta range and (5Â ms) in the gamma range does not suggest that fast
frequencies are propagated with a smaller conduction delay than slow
frequencies: The conduction delay is the same for all frequencies
(about 15Â ms). The frequency dependency of phase-delays is a result of
interactions within and between sources, modeled here in terms of
linear differential equations.In this section, we have applied DCM for
complex cross-spectra to LFP recordings from subcortical sources that
are constituents of the (indirect) cortico-basal ganglia-thalamic
pathways. The conditional estimates of connection strengths suggest
that the extrinsic (between-region) coupling was asymmetrical and
directed, consistently for the two pairs of sources considered. The
associated conduction delays were fairly long (15Â ms), which may
reflect real axonal propagation delays or the inherent slowness of
population dynamics in relation to the firing of individual neurons.
The modeled responses to neuronal fluctuations produced some
interesting and complicated spectral behaviors; with the coherence
between two sources being mediated largely by gamma coherence with a
phase-delay that was substantially less than the phase-delay at beta
frequencies predominant in the source region. This again highlights
the complicated mapping between the underlying functional architecture
generating signals and classical measures based on linear systems
theory.In summary, we have described a way to access conditional
estimates of coherence, phase-delay and covariance functions between
time-series in sensor or source space. This rests on the inversion of
Dynamic Causal Models as generative models for complex-valued data.
The benefits of a generative model include the ability to see how
various model parameters effect coherence and phase-delays in a
frequency-specific manner. Furthermore, one can reconstitute the
conditional coherence and related functions, not just between data
channels but between any hidden states that are included in the model.
In the examples above, we were able to look at the phase-delays
between specific sub-populations comprising one of several sources of
local field potential data. An important consequence of this is that
we can access conditional coherence and phase-delay functions among
sources that are observed non-invasively with EEG and MEG.One
important conclusion of this work is that one should be careful in
interpreting estimates of phase-delays as an expression of conduction
delays. Conduction delays are undoubtedly of major importance for
understanding large-scale neuronal dynamics (Breakspear et al., 2006;
Deco et al., 2009; Jirsa and Ding, 2004; Roberts and Robinson, 2008),
and it is tempting to infer them by assuming a direct relationship
with phase differences in recorded signals (e.g., Brazier, 1972;
Gotman, 1981). However, as shown above, the relation between phase
differences and conduction delays is not straightforward: phase-delays
can differ across frequencies, while conduction delays are determined
by axonal micro-architecture and are fixed across all frequencies.
Furthermore, as shown in Fig.Â 7, conduction delays cannot be inferred
from peaks in the cross-covariance function. In summary, inference on
conduction delays can only be made with a model that parameterizes
these delays. As suggested by our analyses (Fig.Â 4), inference on
conduction delays can benefit from modeling the imaginary components
of recorded data.In this paper, we used invasive LFP recordings,
assuming that the signal at each channel was provided by one source.
However, exactly the same scheme can be applied to EEG and MEG data,
where there may be many more (or less) channels than sources. In this
context, the ability to recover conditional estimates of coupling
among sources (as opposed to channels) is crucial and finesses some of
the issues associated with interpreting coherence among channels,
e.g., volume conduction effects (Schoffelen and Gross, 2009; Stam et
al., 2007; Winter et al., 2007) or correlated noise in the context of
Granger causal estimates (see Valdes-Sosa et al., 2011 for a
discussion).In principle, any metric that has proven fruitful for
connectivity analyses at the sensor level (such as phase-
synchronization, transfer entropy or Granger-causal measures; e.g.,
Brovelli et al., 2004; Bressler et al., 2007; Dhamala et al., 2008;
Lachaux et al., 1999; Rodriguez et al., 1999; Vakorin et al., 2010;
Varela et al., 2001) can be derived from the conditional estimates
provided by DCM. This is because conventional measures can be derived
from the transfer functions that are determined uniquely by the
parameters of a biophysical DCM. With the developments described in
this paper, it is now possible to reproduce conventional metrics of
coupling by replacing the conventional model-free (sample) estimator
with a model-based (conditional) estimator. Crucially, this can be
done in either sensor or source space.Phase-synchronization is usually
used to quantify the amount of nonlinear coupling between channels
(e.g., Rosenblum et al., 1996; Tass and Haken, 1996). The phase-
synchronization index (Eq.Â (2)) can be computed from the distribution
of phase-differences (Eq.Â (4)), which is specified by the conditional
estimates of a DCM. However, the underlying DCM can be linearized (as
in this paper), which provides an interesting perspective on phase-
synchronization. Many people (including ourselves; Chawla et al.,
2001) have tried to understand how zero-lag phase-synchronization can
emerge in nonlinear coupled neuronal oscillators. However, the linear
systems perspective provides a rather trivial explanation: the phase-
delays induced by random fluctuations that are passed between
reciprocally connected sources cancel. In fact, it is rather hard to
generate non-zero lag phase synchronization unless one introduces
substantial asymmetries in the coupling (see Fig.Â 1). Whether this is
a useful perspective remains to be established, particularly in the
context of DCMs that model nonlinear coupling (e.g., Chen et al.,
2008).It is hoped that these developments may harmonize DCM and
conventional time-series analysis. This is meant in the sense that
conventional analyses in electrophysiology can now be complemented
with conditional estimates of spectral behavior that are informed by
the neuronal architecture generating these behaviors. This should
allow intuitions about how phase relationships and coherence arise to
be tested. The marriage between conventional (linear systems) time-
series analysis and DCM is evident in this work at two levels. First,
we use a linearization around the fixed point of the system to enable
the use of linear systems theory to generate predicted spectral
responses. Secondly, the data features predicted are themselves
motivated by linear systems theory. However, the estimation of these
sample spectra highlights the fundamental difference between the
spectral characterizations used in conventional analyses and those
furnished by DCM. This difference rests upon the underlying generative
model. Our sample spectral data were constructed from time series
using a vector autoregressive model At this point conventional
approaches would stop and report power, coherence, and other metrics
of functional connectivity and interpret these quantities directly.
However, from the point of view of DCM, this autoregressive process
(or spectral estimates derived from Fourier or wavelet based
techniques) serves as a feature selection step to provide a compact
summary of the data in terms of their sample cross spectra. The
desired spectral estimates are those that are conditioned upon a
biologically plausible DCM, which best accounts for the sample
(conventional) spectra. In short, the difference between conventional
and conditional cross-spectra (in sensor space) is that the latter are
constrained by a model that allows one to put formal constraints and
prior beliefs into the estimation. Furthermore, there is a unique
mapping between the parameters of the underlying model and the
conditional spectra provided by DCM. Employing complex-valued data
features, as we have shown, becomes especially important when trying
to establish spectral asymmetries in reciprocal connections (e.g.
between forward and backward message-passing in the brain) and
associating these asymmetries with the laminar specificity of forward
and backward connections. To address these sorts of issues it will be
necessary to examine conditional coherence between different
subpopulations (i.e., cortical layers), which is, in principle,
possible with DCM. We will pursue this in future work using ECoG
recordings in awake-behaving monkeys (Rubehn et al., 2009).Perhaps the
simplest and most important point made by the analyses in this paper
is that conventional characterizations of coupling among observed
channel data are basically the starting point for Dynamic Causal
Modeling. In other words, we are interested in establishing how
particular data features like coherence and phase-delay are generated
biophysically. Once one has an explicit mapping between the underlying
biophysical parameters of a generative model and the predicted
behavior in terms of cross-spectral density (and associated functions)
the rather complicated relationship between conduction strengths and
delays and how they manifest in terms of coherence and cross-
correlation functions becomes more evident. In this sense, Dynamic
Causal Modeling of observed cross-spectra may allow one to further
qualify and understand the subtleties of conventional summaries.
Perhaps one of the most important (and unforeseen) aspects of the
analyses presented here was how channel noise can influence sample
covariance and coherence functions in such a qualitative fashion. One
of the key advantages of having a generative model is that one can
partition observed coherence into those parts that are mediated
neuronally and those parts which are not. This may represent one step
towards a more quantitative assessment of coherence and phase-delays
and how they relate to asymmetries in the strength and conduction
delays of underlying neuronal connections.All the inversion schemes
and DCM analyses described in this paper can be implemented using
Matlab routines that are available as part of our academic freeware
from http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm8/.